Anytime we watch pornography, masturbate
and get sexual stimulation, our negative
emotions like fear and anxiety, that
part of your brain just gets suppressed.
And this is where people get into a lot
of trouble because suppressed emotions
just grow over time. So the more guilty
I become, the more of a loser I become,
the harder it is to date, the worse I
feel about myself, the more I fall into
pornography. So this becomes a
neurological cycle. But here's the real
problem. All addictions are on the rise.
And this is why
Dr. K is back and the Harvard trained
psychiatrist is breaking down modern
mental health, addiction, and the
non-traditional ways to break away from
their cycles. There's lots of stuff
happening around us that affects our
lives that we have no control over. For
example, because of the dating and
mating crisis, we no longer have sexual
connections, emotional connections, and
there's a part of the brain that is
getting starved because sex is so
important. So, there's something missing
in our lives, and that's what is
necessary for addiction to grow. And
this is creating huge problems because
it's sort of like if I fill up your
stomach with unhealthy food. You don't
have any micronutrients, but you're not
going to crave broccoli. So that's
what's happening in our society. We're
using porn as a substitute for
relationships. And that's creating these
really strong societal pressures,
including a mass extinction event
because we've got 32-year-olds who do
not know how they're going to ever have
children. Men are getting really, really
angry. There's like this incel movement.
Like women feel safer with a wild bear
than they do with a man. I mean there's
there's a lot that I'm thinking about
like what do you do about this?
The whole reason we get trapped in a
cycle of addiction is because we have
one solution to one problem. The moment
that we create a second solution, a lot
of things change and we'll get to that.
What what about psychedelics?
So here's the real problem with
psychedelics.
Listen to my regular listeners. I know
you don't like it when I ask you to
subscribe at the start of these
conversations. I don't like saying I
don't like it being in there. None of us
like it. It's frustrating. Do you know
what's also frustrating? It's also
frustrating when I go into the back end
of the YouTube channel and I see that
56% of you that listen frequently to
this podcast haven't yet subscribed and
so many of you don't even know that you
haven't subscribed because I see in the
comment section you say to me, you go,
"I didn't even realize I didn't
subscribe." And that actually fuels the
show. It's basically like you're making
a donation to the show. So that's why I
ask all the time because it enables us
to build and build and build and build
and we're going for the long term here.
So, all I'd ask you is if you've seen
this show before and you like it, help
me, help my team here. Hit the subscribe
button and we'll continue to build this
show for you. That's my promise. Thank
you to all of you guys that do
subscribe. Means the world to me. Let's
get on with the show.
[Music]
Dr. K, Stephen, what's up, dude?
We've obviously met several times
before, but for those of you that might
not be familiar,
who are you and what do you do? I'm a
psychiatrist and what I try to do is
help people understand themselves
because one of the harsh lessons of the
world that we live in today is there's
lots of stuff happening around us that
affects our lives that we have no
control over. So if you look at
fundamentally, you know, there's like
war, there's inflation, there's like a
dating and mating crisis, like whatever,
there's AI, there all these like
existential threats, but like you as a
human can do nothing about any of that.
All you can really control is like the
bounds of what's in here, right? That's
like literally the only thing that you
have control over. And so, um, one of
the lessons I learned very early on, I I
spent years studying to become a monk,
was that if I can learn how to master
this, then the rest of the world becomes
way more manageable um, at a minimum and
hopefully incredibly easy.
Is there a step one in understanding
that this is all we can control and
taking control of just this? Is there a
first step that you went through?
Yes, absolutely. Yeah. The first step is
uh trying to control things outside of
me and failing miserably time after time
after time.
Check
because I think it's wild, right? So I I
think it's like most people will try to
get their boss to do something, try to
get their boyfriend to do something, try
to get their girlfriend, and forget
about boyfriend, girlfriend, this person
that I am texting, right? Try to get
them to respond. And we spend so much of
our energy trying to shape the world to
fit us.
And this has also been the direction of
like technology too where we don't want
to change anymore. We want the things
around us to adapt to our environments
like air conditioning. I don't want to
change my tolerance to heat. I want to
change the entire space that I live in
to be more comfortable for me. And this
is creating huge problems because I want
to change the environment to suit my
preferences. you want to change the
environment to suit your preferences and
then we have to be in the same room. So
this is why we fight over where the
climate control is.
And what's the risk there then of of us
having this focus on changing our
external environment? Obviously we're
going to fight, but is there any other
risk in that? Is it just going to be
that me and you our relationship's going
to fray when you want a certain
temperature and I want a different
temperature?
That's a huge problem, right? So I think
if we look at like conflict in the
world, it is two groups of people
wanting the world to be different. So I
want the boundaries of my country to be
here. You want the boundaries of you
want to move that line somewhere else.
And this is literally why wars start.
So I I think that what we spend a lot of
time and energy in is trying to shape
the world towards us. But that is not
fundamentally possible. And so instead
like we could be investing that energy
into ourselves. learn how to craft
myself into let's say perfection
loaded word which carries a lot of stuff
but then the moment that you do that
things become really really easy
things become really easy
yeah so I think if you look at like um
you know there's a ton of research that
shows that you know happiness
productivity success all of these three
things like come together so the one of
the biggest mistakes I think people make
in society is like they talk about work
life balance like that's wrong. Work
life balance implies that you have to
make a sacrifice for the other thing,
right? That these two I I don't think
that that's actually technically true.
If you if you look at the way that
society really I mean the way that a
human being really works, people who are
happy with their work will feel happy
and they will work the best, right? The
outcomes from their productivity will be
higher. This is not a trade-off that we
need to make. The biggest problem is
that most people are forced to make
trade-offs and then what they try to do
is they try to find the perfect job. And
this is what's so silly, right? People
will say do what you love for work and
you'll never work a day in your life,
right? Like people will say like if your
passion becomes your job, like you'll
never work a day in your life. And then
there are other people who also say, you
know, keep your passion is your passion
because the moment it becomes your job,
you'll start to hate it.
And that's like how can both of these
things be true? It's and it kind of is
like there's no way to win. So I think
that's where like winning happens
internally and once you start doing that
and there's tons of research about flow
state and things like that that once you
become happy internally even in terms of
relationship success you know if you
carry a lot of unhappiness with you in a
relationship it won't work well. So
internal work like will manifest outward
and I don't mean that in a spiritual
sense I mean that like in a I mean that
that is true but in in like a very
concrete sense right if you show up at
work and you feel happy like people will
like you more
you'll be more productive
and is so is there a second step so I
understand I tried to control the world
I wasn't successful step two is to focus
that energy inwards and take control of
my internal state which is difficult
because it feels to us like We're very
much being dragged often by our
temptations, the dopamine receptors in
our brain or something.
Yeah.
And we have a bad night's sleep, we wake
up in a bad mood, and then we have a bad
day.
That's how it feels.
So So, and I I think if we sort of think
about it, right? So, it's like uh you
know, I I started my car this morning. I
I looked at the gas tank. There was only
a little bit of gas left and then I
ended up on the highway without any gas.
I ran out of gas. Right? That's one
follows the other. Like that's how it
feels, right? Like I just I left and I'm
like, "Oh no, I'm running low on gas."
And then I run out of gas. That's what
happens logically, right?
So how do you fix that problem?
Go to the gas station.
Absolutely.
The whole problem is if I ask you what
is go to the gas, what's the equivalent
in that analogy for a human being? No
one knows. You're like, right? So if I
were to ask you, okay, you wake up, you
slept poorly, you wake up, now you're in
a bad mood, therefore you have a bad
day. you're assuming that those two
things are connected. Those two things,
I mean, are connected, but only if you
don't know how to go to the gas station.
So, they're literally everything from
like practices to things you can eat to
all kinds of things to alter that chain
of causality. So, I think the second
step is first of all understanding what
is going on inside you. How how do how
can you move the levers? What is the
internal chain of causality? And once
you understand that, then you can start
to implement change. And that's when it
becomes easy. So if you sort of think
about it like I know it sounds weird
because it sounds really hard but
literally the difference between
something hard and something easy is
whether you know how to do it.
Right.
Yeah.
It's like oh like the Rubik's cube is
hard. Like a Rubik's cube is hard but if
you know how to do it it becomes easy.
So it's about really understanding where
do my desires come from? Where do my
temptations come from? And here you are
trying to control them. Forget about
controlling them. Like I don't like
controlling my desires. I hate it. It's
hard. It requires a lot of discipline.
It requires a lot of willpower. What
works way better is sublimating them.
What does that mean?
Getting rid of them.
How would how would you put it in the
context of pornography in terms of
controlling that desire and being
productive and not letting it consume
you.
Let's start with PR first principle.
Good diagnosis precedes good treatment.
Right? So in medicine, the quality, this
is what a lot of people think. Doctors
are about treating people, right?
Medicine is about treating things. But
actually 50% or more of our training is
in diagnosis. So you have to understand
the problem. And this is not just true
of doctors. This is like if I have a
plumber who's coming to my house,
whether they can fix what the problem is
depends on whether they can find the
problem, right? What's actually causing
the leak. Then you replace that. So
that's true of life in general. So if
you have a problem like pornography, the
first thing that you have to do is
understand
why you were addicted to it because
that'll show you what you need to fix.
And with pornography, I think there are
basically like five layers to it. The
first is a societal layer. There's a
reason why all addictions are on the
rise. There is a fundamental change in
society, in the way that we connect with
society that makes us more addicted to
stuff. So if it was in the substance
itself like in pornography itself then
what we would see is there's a rise only
in pornography addiction. But since
there's a rise in everything that means
that something is fundamental is going
on. We can get to that a little bit
later. Next thing that we need to do
about understanding about pornography
addiction is understand physiology
neuroscience and psychology. So if we
look at pornography addiction
first thing is that it is a very
powerful emo emotional coping mechanism.
So the way that our brain is designed is
like procreation kind of is the point,
right? We can sort of say that like the
reason that life exists, the purpose of
life is to procreate,
which means to have kids.
Yeah. Right. So So this is where if you
kind of look at like the way that our
body and our brain are designed, it's
like if the opportunity for sexual
relations and procreations is there,
then we're going to push everything else
to the side.
So anytime we watch pornography or we
get sexual stimulation, our amygdala,
which is our emotional circuit of the
brain, experiences negative emotions
like fear and anxiety. It's also our
survival center of the brain. And you
turn on porn. That part of your brain
just gets suppressed. And this is why a
lot of people don't realize what a
pornography addict looks like. A lot of
people think it means like I'm watching
porn and masturbating a lot. But most
pornography addicts will watch it and
not even necessarily masturbate or
they'll watch it for hours throughout
the day and aren't necessarily
masturbating during that time. And
that's because once you have that
stimulation on the side, it's kind of
like aromatherapy for your brain. It's
kind of suppressing your amydala. It's
kind of calming you down because it has
that neurologic effect. The reason that
it has that neurologic effect is because
sex is so important, right? So these
circuits of the brain are very
powerfully activated. The other thing
that is really addictive about
pornography is that it does cause a
dopamine secretion. So orgasm feels
really good. And so anytime we have an
orgasm, we get a a surge of dopamine. We
get a surge of pleasure. It feels really
really good. And then the other problem
that that creates and this is the curse
of humanity is that anytime we get
pleasure we also buy ourselves craving
and motivation. So when we secrete
dopamine in the nucleus ccumbent, it
doesn't just do one thing. These three
functions are fundamentally tied
together in our neurosircuitry. So if I,
you know, drink this and I enjoy it, I
will want it tomorrow. That's like
there's no way to escape that effect. So
when I gain pleasure from pornography, I
am buying myself craving. I am buying
myself motivation towards it
in the future.
In the future 100%. Right? So it's it's
behavioral reinforcement.
And then what happens is so these are
the two fundamental pieces at a
neuroscience level. Then what happens is
we kind of find ourselves like in a trap
because since it is so good at these two
things nothing else is as effective. And
we as human beings if you look at like
what we're designed to do on a
physiologic level it is to be efficient.
So why do we love unhealthy food?
because we evolved in in areas where if
there's one bite that has 300 calories,
like that bite will save you, right?
That's that's what allows you to
survive. So, what we sort of got is like
a a calorie dense neurological
dopamine surge from pornography. And
it's also like suppresses our emotions
really, really, really deeply. And this
is like like literally true. So, I don't
know if you've ever, you know, if you've
been in love or like you've known
friends who who are in love, but like
when you're in love and you're like
horny for something, right? There's like
this idea of postnut clarity and like
pre-nut fog, I guess. So, literally the
way that our our lust circuitry works is
it suppresses all of these other parts
of the brain. It suppresses the part of
our brain that assesses risk.
For someone that doesn't know what that
means, could you be a bit bit more sort
of direct?
Yeah. So like when you fall in love on
the less vulgar side. So when you fall
in love like you start to do stupid
things,
right? Like you do stupid things when
you're in love. And that's not a
mistake. That's the way that it's wired
because evolutionarily there were
basically two human beings. Okay. One
who would fall in love and did not do
stupid things and one who did fall in
love and did do stupid things. Which one
of those two do you think is more likely
to procreate? When you say stupid
things, give me an example.
Uh, I'm gonna ignore my job. I've just
gotten financially stable and I've
fallen in love with someone who has a
pile of credit card debt. This is a
terrible idea to enter a relationship
with them because I've just gotten all
my [__] sorted out and they don't have
any of their [__] sorted out. So, there
are all kinds of red flags that we
ignore
on purpose because if if we didn't
ignore those red flags, then we wouldn't
end up procreating.
Got you. We don't want to be rational in
that moment because rationality would
say and and that's literally what
happens. So we have circuits of the
brain that will actually inhibit and
shut off the rational parts of our
brain. And this is where we get to
postnot clarity which is this experience
that many men have where after you
finish the sexual act you feel like very
clear-headed right and so then what
happens is now what's and why is that?
That's because the lustful parts of your
brain, we're inhibiting, like literally
inhibiting and and and shutting off the
thinking parts of your brain. And once
the lustful part shuts off,
then we start thinking again.
Probably in my early 20s was the first
time I experienced postnut clarity. And
it was, I think it was 2 3 a.m. in the
morning. Here's me talking about my
masturbation. It was like 2 3:00 a.m. in
the morning. And there was this person
that I was like vaguely interested in.
I'm like super horny. I'm arranging to
meet them at like 3:00 a.m. I think I'm
like 21 years old. And I decide to
masturbate instead. And immediately
after I masturbated instead, it was like
a completely different person inhabited
my body. I was like, why? Within
seconds, I was like, why the [__] were
you going to get out of bed at 3:00 a.m.
in the morning and drive for 55 minutes
to meet someone you have really no
interest in? And it was like that person
could not recognize the person I was 10
minutes earlier. And I I I remember one
day trying to explain this to um a woman
and she couldn't understand it. And I
actually think she was quite offended by
it because it's quite an offense
offensive concept I imagine to a woman
to hear that men experience a a drop in
interest potentially sometimes
um after they masturbate.
Yeah. And I I think the reason it's
offensive to women is because in that
moment the dude is objectifying her,
right? Like it's like the the woman
becomes a sexual object. It's you're not
a human anymore. And like the reason
they're offended is because that's
exactly what happens. In that moment,
there are such powerful drivers in our
brain to drive us to procreate that like
we don't view them as a complex human
being with thoughts and feelings, right?
We are just really really horny. And
that's literally what happens like in
our brain. We stop viewing them as
complex objects. And so the reason they
get offended is is sort of because
they're right. and we start to view them
that way and but that's also like
biological there are absolutely like
societal and psychological things that
we can get into in a minute but like
that that make things that worse but I
think it's like it's understandable and
it's also like how we work
yeah it's which is difficult to say you
just I just want to be honest about it
because I think if we start from a place
of like total honesty about these things
we can actually reason up to some real
solutions if we're trying to be
politically correct or whatever we're
never going to get to real answers here
absolutely and all all men I I hope will
experience postnut clarity and also like
that doesn't make us bad men. It's a
it's a physiologic thing. And I think
the key thing about whether you're good
or bad is the way that you manage it,
right? And that's kind of what I'm
talking about is like you have to
understand what is happening in your
brain in order to then willfully take a
step back and and sort of like think
about what am I feeling? And then
eventually once we understand where
postnut clarity comes from, we can
cultivate it without
having to not
just just this is I know we're on a
little bit of a tangent here, but do
women experience the inverse of postnut
clarity because there's a lot of
oxytocin released when we have sex. So I
was just just reading a study from 2021
in the journal of sex research and it
found that women were more likely to
feel emotionally connected, vulnerable
and have a desire for postcoidal
closeness like cuddling or talking.
However, men who are in long-term
relationships reported feeling similarly
bonded to women, which is probably
explains actually why I'm also down to
cuddle after because she's been my
partner for seven years.
Yeah. So, there is so much there. So,
the now we're getting I mean, if you
want to go into that, that's the
societal element, right? So there is the
neuroscience of
pornography addiction, what it does to
your brain, but there is a fundamental
societal issue which is driving men
towards pornography and also addresses
this kind of thing where relationships
between men and women are getting
harder. And as relationships between men
and women are getting harder, there's a
part of the the the brain more often the
male brain that is getting starved for
something because we no longer have
sexual connections, emotional
connections with women. And so when we
get hungry for something, then the brain
will try to find what it can to satisfy
it.
Right? Right. So there there's a part of
our brain that you know that drives us
towards procreation but often times in a
real relationship it comes with a lot of
other things.
Yeah.
Right.
The problem is that when we're and this
gets a bit technical but when our brain
wants something it usually wants a whole
package. So for example like if you feel
hungry you don't want calories. I want
to eat this and I want to eat this and I
want to drink this and I want to have
some of this. Right? So there are lots
of different things that my brain wants
or my body wants and they're usually all
they all come together in in a real
healthy way in in a sorry in a natural
way which is why it's healthy. Not that
natural is healthy but that's what we've
adapted to. The problem with pornography
is that it gives us a slice of what our
brain craves. And the problem is once it
gives you a slice once you get that
sexual gratification your emotion your
emotional connection is not met. You
have no bond. You have no feeling of
safety nothing like that. that often
times you're filled with like regret and
all kinds of guilt and things like that.
And so even though you're satisfying
that sort of procreative drive, all of
the stuff that comes with it stays
unsatisfied.
And then the real problem is once we
satisfy the procreative drive, the
motivation to go and get all of those
other things disappears,
right? So once I nut postnut clarity, I
don't need a relationship with anyone
else.
Right? I'm not willing to sacrifice to
deal with this person. So, so it's it's
kind of like it's sort of like if I if I
fill up your stomach with just unhealthy
food, like let's say I just give you
straight calories like some highly
processed like hamburger
wrapped in donuts or whatever and
drizzled with take your pick of artery
clogging stuff. After you eat that, you
don't have any fiber, you don't have any
micronutrients, but you're not going to
crave broccoli.
Yeah.
Right. So that's what's happening in our
society is we're using porn as a
substitute for relationships and that's
creating these really strong societal
pressures and being driven by. So what
have you seen happening between men and
women right now? H um women I think
don't need men as much as they used to
and I think this is in part because of
this whole sexual revolution and the
pill and the feminism and all these
things which is has you know tremendous
upsides. I think that women and men are
having less sex, they're getting married
less. Men's attitude towards women has
become
a little bit more resentful in certain
pockets of the internet.
They perceive relationships with the
other sex to be
disposable more than ever before.
Men's spe view women
I would say both. And I think in part
that's because of dating apps. Just the
perception of choice. The feeling that
if you don't work out there's another
thousand people on my phone that I could
give a shot to. I think the equation of
a relationship when we think about the
investment it takes for it to work and
what you get from it, people now
perceive the equation not to be worth
it.
Okay. I think there's a lot of great
stuff there. So, so you're like a fully
formed adult man, right?
I think so. I hope so.
Yeah. Like you're you're like you're
like a man.
You're not like a kid. You're not like a
like a dude in early stages of
development. You've like you've got a
career. You've got a relationship.
You're buying a house. Like you were an
adult.
Yeah.
So if I was an 18year-old.
And I came to you and let's say I'm your
nephew or something like that and I'm
like Stephen, fully formed adult,
handsome man in relationship. I'm
struggling to date.
Yeah.
What should I do?
You want me to give you advice? [__]
Um I think you should work on yourself.
Okay.
Especially as an 18-year-old man because
I think you need to, especially at that
age, create some advantages. is. And so
working on yourself could be learning,
reading, going to the gym, building up
the ability to provide for someone else
and to protect somebody else. That's
kind of really where I'd start. And
again, that's biased because that's what
I did at 18 years old. I actually didn't
date. I think I've been on five dates my
entire life.
Okay. So, let's say I do that.
Yeah.
And it doesn't work.
Okay. So, I'm like, "Hey, I'm on this
growth journey." And I'm sure you've
encountered this and there are going to
be people in the audience who are like,
"The reason they're watching this
podcast is because they're trying to do
that. They're still not getting dates,
right? It's still hard to find a
girlfriend.
Then what do you have to say to them?
I would assume that the reason it's not
working is because they're not in this
frame of mind to find love.
And when someone says when a dude says,
I I'm trying to do everything right,
what is the most common response that
they get? Right. So like
try harder or like
Yeah. Right. If you kind of like look at
Twitter, what you'll find is people will
be like, "It's impossible to find a good
woman." And then like men will be and
let's say a dude says that or a woman
says that doesn't. It's on both sides.
It's impossible to find a good man. And
then people won't be like, "Yeah, it's
impossible to find a good man." Maybe
some people will be supportive. So
you'll have a woman who says it's
impossible to find a good man. You know,
they'll there are a lot of people who
are like, "Yeah, like like men are
trash." Fine. And then a lot of people
will be like, "You're not trying hard
enough. You're not going to the right
places." is that's that gets we as men
get that a lot more because there's a
societal bias that men don't need help.
Right? So if if if you look at like the
the comparison of scholarships, male
only scholarships versus female only
scholarships, there's about $4.9 billion
worth of scholarships given out in the
United States from private sources. Uh
female scholarships outside of athletics
are way higher than ma male
scholarships. So if you look at
athletics, the number is way higher for
men. But the really weird thing is that
like 60% of people who graduate from
college or in college somewhere in there
are women. So the the people who need
more gender-based support are men, but
we don't really do that. We're usually
like if a man has a problem, this is a
man's problem to solve. And when a man
goes out and says, "I'm having trouble
dating." But what people will say is men
will say, "Work harder, try harder." You
know, people will like like and people
will really be nasty about it. They're
like, "Do you not know how to talk to
women? stop being a creep, things like
that. And then the other thing that
we're sort sort of starting to not
starting, we're really seeing is that
there is like this very very like deep
anger, entitlement. There's like this
incel movement. Um, you know, there's
this like alpha male, beta male kind of
thing. And I don't know if you kind of
get this, but there's like a deep sense
of like anger, right? There's like a in
men, and I think women feel it too. This
is why women are so terrified. This
whole thing about would you rather be in
a forest with a bear or a man? You did
you hear about this? So like people
would ask this question on Twitter to
women. It's like would you be rather be
in a forest with like a bear or a man?
And like women feel safer with a wild
bear than they do with a man. So I think
people are picking up on this like
existential and I don't know if that
makes sense to you, but there's like an
existential like cry coming from men
which can manifest as anger. I think
we're also seeing reflections of this
like in South Korea with like dropping
birth rates, right? Where like men are
getting really really angry. They feel
really entitled. And I think this is
where it's important to understand a
biological difference. And we'll get to
what I think is going on.
So a woman does not need a man in order
to pass her genes along, right? So I
mean like literally, I know it sounds
weird, but like if you're a woman, you
can just go to a sperm bank and you can
get pregnant.
Yeah.
You can just have a child without you
can also argue that it's easier for
women to find a man who is willing to
impregnate them than it is for a man to
find a woman willing to carry their
child. But I mean literally we live in a
society where women can just procreate
if they feel like it and men cannot. So
there's a fundamental power balance
there. I'm not saying it's right or
wrong. I'm just saying it is what it is.
So I think what we're starting to see is
actually like a mass extinction event.
We are seeing natural selection for a
group of men who have no options. Many
years ago, I was a loser. And the the
world that we lived in
necessitated my entry into third spaces.
I had trouble talking to girls, but I
was forced into college. When I got my
first job, it was serving ice cream. I
was forced to interact with girls. I was
active in a s summer camp where I met
girls, was forced to talk to girls. So,
I sucked at talking to girls, but the
world that I lived in was structured so
that I still had to talk to girls. I had
no option to retreat from interaction
and painful interaction with the
opposite sex. I think literally what
we're seeing because all this stuff
started to get really bad during CO. So,
what happened in CO was actually like a
natural selection event, but it wasn't a
natural selection event about life and
death. That's what people think natural
selection is. What happened during CO?
Sure, a lot of people died and that's
bad. But the postcoid world, some people
were able to adapt to it and some people
are not. We're seeing a spike in social
anxiety. Now I can work from home. Now I
have pornography. Now I have all this
stuff going on to where I'm not forced
to learn how to interact with women.
Does that kind of make sense?
Yeah.
So now you can live your whole life at
home. And I think what's starting to
happen is literally natural selection.
And the way that natural selection works
is people think it's like, oh, if I'm
natural, natural selection means I'm
weak and someone is strong. That's not
technically correct. Natural selection
is you were made a certain way, someone
else is made a different way and then
the environment changes.
Which one of these two is suited to?
It's not even adaptation because all the
adaptations have been made. And I think
the best example of this is like
literally Darwin's finches. So, you've
got like, you know, one finch that has
like a hard beak that can crack a nut.
You've got another finch that has a very
sharp beak that can get like a a a bug
out of like a cactus like that has these
very like tight tight flowers. And so,
if something happens and all the cacti
die out, the birds that rely on the
cacti bugs will start to die out too.
They don't know how to procreate in this
world anymore. And I think what we're
seeing with like all these alphas,
betas, incelss, what we're seeing in
South Korea is there is a whole
generation of men that is like we are
literally watching them die out in real
time because we've got 32 year olds,
35year-olds who do not have children, do
not know how they're going to ever have
children. And this is where like I know
this sounds bizarre, but so that's
actually happening. That's not bizarre.
That's birth rate in South Korea is like
7. So there's a bunch of men who will
never pass on their genes in the alpha
male, beta male, whatever. Like, you
know, in that kind of language, they
talk a lot about like procreation and
legacy and stuff like that. But I I
almost wonder is there a mechanism in a
human being that if your genes know
they're dying out, what would they
trigger in your mind?
Right? And I think what they would
trigger is exactly what we're seeing.
This like existential panic, angst, even
aggression, entitlement, because if
these men do not behave in this way,
they are literally going to die out. So
what we see in this postcoid world is
that people like maybe you or me who
were like losers and didn't know how to
talk to chicks in high school, we were
forced into social interaction where we
basically like that's where we developed
uh in in order so that we could talk to
girls. But in this postcoid world, all
those spaces are gone. There's no
forcable interaction. So then there are
some people for whom it's natural to
talk to girls. And that's why like we
see this dichotomy where it's almost
like you know some people like just put
yourself out there, just work out, work
on yourself and things will work out.
And then there are a lot of other people
who are like that's not working. And I
imagine if you went back like 200 years,
went back to the Gapagos Islands and you
took Darwin's finches and you put them
on Twitter, you would see that what
exactly what we're seeing. Some people
are like, "Oh, like you have trouble
getting bugs, just crack a nut. Like
just get better at cracking nuts." But
they have something in their makeup,
something in their attachment style,
something in in their their tendency for
social anxiety, something in their
neuroticism, something in their
circumstances, something in their
support structure that allows them to
put forth effort and succeed. And then
there are these other people over here
who will go to therapy, who will work on
themselves professionally,
who will show up on dating apps and
because of the shape of their face which
cannot be fundamentally altered or some
other thing which they're not even aware
of, they grew up with a certain
attachment style that they're not aware
of. they grew up with on the spectrum
and their capacity to make eye contact
and emotional connections is very
difficult. So there's this whole crop of
people who I think are trying really
hard. I don't think they're losers. I
don't think they're like pathetic or
anything like that. I think there's
something about the architecture of how
these people are built so that standard
advice does not apply to them. And what
I feel when I sit with these people is
like someone who is dying out. Like
that's what it feels like to sit with
this this person's life. They're not
living a life. They're in a slow
protracted process of dying. And when
you are in a slow protracted process of
dying, pornography shows up. And then
you've got this weird thing that goes on
where you get this spurt of dopamine,
this existential dread of like I am not
getting to participate in life. There
are all these people out there that are
participating. They tell me, "Oh, you
should do this, but it doesn't work."
And it's just imagine how terrifying it
is if someone gives you advice
that's supposed to work and it doesn't
work for you. How [__] are you? Right?
Because that's the answer. It's like
some people have cancer, we give them
cancer treatment, they get better. But
if some people have cancer and
everyone's like, "Hey, do this
chemotherapy." And it doesn't work, then
how screwed are you? You're very
screwed. So this is, I think, what we're
seeing. This deep existential loss, this
desire for connection is somehow like
intersecting with pornography. Because I
think pornography addiction has a
spiritual component, too. And if you
talk to people who are addicted to
pornography, they can feel it. They feel
like spiritually like empty. They're
like, I'm not doing anything in with my
life. So, one of the two variables that
correlates with pornography addiction,
the two strongest variables that
correlate with pornography addiction,
one of them is a sense of
meaninglessness in life. And there's a
weird spiritual angle that I talked
about, but the other really simple thing
is, you know, if you want to stop
watching porn, you need to have a reason
to stop watching porn. And the problem
with porn is that you can be kind of
like living your life and then in the in
between hours when you're like back from
work and before you go on a date or
maybe you're swiping on Tinder and no
one's really answering or whatever, like
you just have these hours in the day
where there's nothing going on. You're
not living for anything. So, you might
as well jerk off.
I mean, there's there's a lot that I'm
thinking about. The first is if we go
back up to your point about this being a
bit bit of an extinction event, it poses
a question about like what do you do
about that? M
um you said also people are trying to
implement the advice but it's not
working.
Now does that mean that that's a
question of like motivation, discipline?
Is it um is it bad advice? What do we do
there? And um the third I guess question
that comes to mind is does society have
a responsibility to intervene in some
way to correct this?
So I I think does society have a
responsibility? I don't think that is a
real thing. So I have never seen society
take a responsibility. I don't think
society can take a responsibility.
Right? So if like like how do I get
society like who do I talk to?
But but if you think about other people
that are in marginalized groups, society
intervenes to make the world
the governments and the way that we make
our laws and the way that we give out
money and grants and the way that we
shape our communities.
Yeah. So I I understand the question but
I I think like this and this is just the
way that I think. So if I ask you what
is society you say the government and
then who is the government? What is the
government? It's people.
Yeah.
So I think this comes down to forget
about societal responsibility and I
think this is one of the problems. Not
to say that it is the problem but this
is just the way that I think. There was
a case, I don't remember her name, of a
woman who was being sexually assaulted
in public like on a street at nighttime
and there were a bunch of neighbors who
were like aware that the sexual assault
was happening and no one called for
help.
And the reason no one called for help is
because everyone assumed that somebody
else would call for help. You know whose
problem is it? Oh, society should fix
this. And the moment that we say society
should fix this, we stop taking
individual responsibility. And the
moment that we stop taking individual
responsibility, like unless someone
shows up and runs for office and says,
"My goal is to do this," which by the
way is happening in like South Korea. So
like conservatives that are very like
there's this huge tension in South Korea
right now between men and women and this
4B movement where women are like we're
not going to have kids anymore. And then
there's like this conservative kind of
like pro-masculine kind of movement that
is moving into government and says like
this needs to change. we see governments
responding to this mating crisis. Um,
right. So, I think like China is now
paying people to have children. So,
there's all kinds of like moves that are
happening. So, is it society's
responsibility? Like, I don't know. So,
I think if society doesn't do anything,
what's going to happen will be really
simple. And that's what I mean by we're
we're witnessing a mass extinction
event. We have a group of young men who
are somewhere between 15 to 50 who will
just never procreate and then they will
literally die out, right? their genes
will not be passed on and for the people
who do procreate they will have been
adapted to the postcoid world.
Yeah.
Right. So they know how to form they
they succeed on Tinder. Whereas like if
you go and you look at like if you go to
like um some kind of senior event and
you look at all the people who have
grandkids, half the men there would not
have succeeded on Tinder.
Yeah.
Right. And this is something that really
like shocks people when I kind of tell
them this, but if you want to see like
who's succeeding, it's not the the dudes
on Tinder who are getting laid 15 times.
Like go to like a I mean, this is
sometimes a little creepy, but like if
you go to a playground, you're going to
see like a lot of like averagel looking
men with like average looking dad bods,
which with average median incomes who
are like having kids, and that's what's
really happening. But even those men are
adapted in some way, right? because
they're not exceptionally attractive.
They're not exceptionally rich, but they
have something going on in their
psychological makeup which allows them
to form bonds and procreate.
You just said that a huge amount of men
between the age of 15 and 50 will not
pass on their genes. They will
effectively die out of the gene mating
pool. So, people will hear that and many
people will go, "Well, that's
evolution."
Yeah.
And but I want to understand if there's
a counterpoint to that. it should should
society intervene should why is you know
in the short term we're going to have a
lot of men who are disillusioned that
become incel find themselves in pockets
of the internet are resentful all those
kinds of things but should society
intervene to course correct that should
we put systems in place to make sure
that those men meet partners I
I'm going to I'm going to answer that
question with a question
okay
if let's say a huge swath of people are
dying out from cancer yeah
should we intervene with that
yes
if a huge swath of people are dying out
from like a virus should we intervene
100% yes
if a huge swath of people are dying out
from genocide should we inter intervene
with that
yes
so I think there are two important
things one
it's slightly different though isn't it
because it's just it's whether you
so one is about death
right so one is like if if a human being
is dying
we should step in but natural selection
isn't necessarily about death this is
what's really tricky about it this is
why I think it gets hard natural
selection is about passing on your genes
Yeah,
right. It's about creating viable
offspring. And this is where if someone,
you know, and I think we also say yes,
like if there's, you know, a couple that
wants to have a child and that child has
cystic fibrosis, should we help that
couple? Should we help a couple
procreate? We also say yes.
Yeah.
So that's why we have IVF and things
like that. So I think the the tricky
thing about the reason that this is
different is because that's a couple. If
if a woman is unable to have kids, even
if we say if a man is unable to have
kids, should we medically intervene so
that it they're capable of having kids?
Yes. Right. So, if we're talking about a
couple, if we're talking about a human
being and there's a medical problem or
if we're talking about protecting people
from death, the answer is yes. This is a
new question
which is do people have the right and I
don't know if right is and maybe that's
the right word to reproduce and this is
what's so challenging about it is like
the answer is basically no because for
men that requires the consent of someone
else and my right to reproduce never
trumps someone's right to not want to
reproduce with me. I think we sort of
accept that right that that's correct.
Now, this is where the fundamental
biological difference comes in because a
woman doesn't need a man to reproduce. I
can go to a sperm bank.
And once again, you can argue that you
can get laid if you want to, but I that
hasn't been my experience. I think women
struggle with loneliness and finding
sexual partners and stuff quite a bit as
well. There's some really bad
perceptions on the internet. So, I think
this is like a new problem for society,
which is why it hasn't been solved.
Now, that's why the the the track that I
take, I don't know what the societal
answer is. I'm not a sociologist. So
what I have found thankfully we don't
need to sol I don't think we need to
solve that problem. Does it need to be
solved? Sure. Should someone solve it? I
think so. But I think what what what I
found works really well is that usually
the problem that these men are failing
to adapt to I is can be fixed. But the
problem is that the solutions that work
for the people who are successful
will not work for the people who are
unsuccessful. These are apples and
oranges right? So like and this is the
big mistake is that when when I say okay
I am happily married with two kids but
the thing that I did won't work for
these people that's been my clinical
experience my advice does not work for
them your advice won't work for them
what we need is a different system that
addresses their fundamental problems
right cuz I had what it takes internally
I was loved as a child like f like this
is how deep it runs. So, I knew how to
give love and receive love. A third of
the men that I meet do not know how to
give love and do not know how to receive
love. Has nothing to do with their
Tinder profiles, that's why they're
[__] And when people can say, "Go to
the gym, make more money." But if you do
not know how to fundamentally give or
receive love, then like that's a huge
problem.
Is that where you start when you're
trying to solve this on an individual
basis?
Uh, yeah. So I mean I start giving and
receiving love is not where I start
because that's like so foreign to them
that they don't know how to do that.
Okay?
Right? So I think there are a couple of
things. Uh the first place that I start
with most men is in understanding their
emotions.
So we have all kinds of patterns that we
engage in that are driven by different
parts of us that we have no insight
into. And usually this is like where the
money is. So I I was I had had a great
conversation yesterday with a buddy of
mine and you know he he gave me this
fantastic example which I've seen so
many times. So you know there's a a lot
of women will talk about men who are
afraid of commitment.
Yeah.
You know so it's like oh like I'm dating
this person he's great but he's afraid
of commitment. He's afraid of
commitment. And then and then then it
kind of becomes like oh like the dude is
like he like needs to step up and he
needs to like be a man and needs to like
learn how to commit. So we sort of put
put the onus on the man. You're afraid
of commitment. You need to fix that.
It's a really funny thing is if you look
at like women that I've worked with,
they sort of fall into this pattern
where they date men who are afraid of
commitment and that's why they're
looking for commitment because they
haven't found it yet, right? And so the
really funny thing is sometimes women
will select for a man who is afraid of
commitment because deep down they are
afraid of commitment.
So true. So I I'm going to find someone
who I know is afraid of commitment and
therefore I can blame them for never
committing. And this is how I know this
because sometimes the dude will come
into my office and he will work on his
fear of commitment and he will conquer
it. And the moment that he conquers his
fear on commitment, the woman will
retreat. They'll get terrified. They'll
start to find all kinds of problems. And
it's not just like men and it's not just
women are guilty of this. So there are
all kinds of patterns that people will
engage in that they have no insight
into. First of all, understand your
emotions. Then you will understand your
behaviors. Oh, like why do I keep on pe
selecting people who are afraid of
commitment? Because I'm afraid of
commitment. And if I can find somebody
else who's afraid of commitment, I can
blame them from it. And I never have to
deal with my lattering up my fear of
commitment. So there's a lot of stuff
that comes with emotions. So awareness
of emotions, awareness of your your
patterns, the ability to regulate them,
and I'd say that kind of ties it up.
So step one is understanding one's
emotions, and then step two is sort of
giving them a way to deal with those
emotions that isn't the pornography or
the addictive behavior or the short-term
desire that might be destructive for
their long-term their long-term goals.
I think so.
And and what is that? How do I deal with
the emotions? So if I'm if I'm if I have
a craving to to engage in some kind of
addictive behavior like pornography,
what should I do instead?
So, so if we're getting super practical,
I can give you kind of like my paradigm
for treating pornography addiction.
So, the first thing is that I know this
sounds kind of weird, but the first
thing that I recommend people do is
schedule their pornography usage. So,
pick one hour of the day where they
watch pornography. So, if we look at
like one of the problems with
pornography, it's that it invades all
the cracks in your life. And then over
time, what it does is it widens those
cracks. So, the first thing that you've
got to do is like move it to like one
part of the day. I know a lot of people
are fans of like cold turkey and like
like you know sobriety and things like
that. I think for the digital addictions
that's harder. So, log out of all of
your devices. Restrict it to one hour of
the day. Next thing that you need to do
is anticipate what are going to be the
hard parts of your day. So, what are the
parts where you're going to feel really
bad about something and what's your
plan? What's your alternative in those
moments? So the other really tricky
thing about the brain is that when we
are suffering, we cannot create new
solutions.
So usually when we get attacked by
something, our survival instincts kick
in. Our reflexes kick in. Reflexes and
innovation are at two opposite ends of
the spectrum.
So you have to innovate before you need
to use it. Right? We need to have a fire
hydrant in our house before the fire
starts. You can't go finding a fire
hydrant. That's a big mistake that a lot
of people make. So, your emotional
regulation techniques, you need to be
practiced, whether that's meditation.
Um, I really like something called urge
surfing. So, urge surfing is something
that's confuses a lot of people. So, if
you have a desire, Stephen, like, do you
want anything right now?
That house I've put an offer in.
Okay, great.
Or I'm I'm getting a little bit hungry.
So, maybe some
In either case, if you don't get those
things, the desire will disappear over
time, right? So if you don't get the
house 40 years from now, there may be a
seed of desire left, but you're not
going to like want that house 40 like
you know that's what's really confusing
for people is people don't realize that
if you do not give into your desire
it'll disappear on its own and people
sort of know this if you've been hungry
and you'll notice that you feel hungry
but if you don't feed yourself the
hunger goes away. It'll come back
because your s it'll be get recreated
stronger by certain signals in your
body. But the desire disappears if you
don't give into it. So urge surfing is
recognizing that you don't need to
conquer your addiction. You need to wait
it out.
So if you have a desire for pornography,
the desire will start, it'll increase,
it'll peak, and then it'll disappear on
its own. any addictive substance, you
just need to play the waiting game. So,
it can help to have an emotional
regulation technique. So, the the
technique that I recommend for most of
my patients is alternate nostril
breathing. So, there's something about
our nose that when we change the way
that we breathe, it alters our
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous
system and causes us to calm down.
Anytime we have an urge for something,
we feel unsatisfied. When we feel
unsatisfied, it creates stress. Stress
causes a spike in cortisol. Cortisol
will then activate our nervous system.
So when you want something, it's like I
I want it. So you need to just calm
yourself down. So alternate nostril
breathing is a great way to do that. We
start that by taking your hand, do this.
Okay?
And then thumb is out. Great. Then what
we're going to do is take your thumb,
block the right nostril, breathe in.
Now with a full breath of air, switch.
There you go. Breathe out.
Breathe in through the same nostril.
Switch. Breathe out.
In.
Switch. Out.
Switch.
out.
We'll do one more. So, breathe in
through the same nostril.
Switch and out.
So, if you do that practice,
you'll notice a couple things. One is
that one of your nostrils is more closed
than the other. That's completely
normal. It'll alternate about every 90
minutes if you're healthy. Okay?
So this practice if we sort of think
about it, what were we talking about
again?
Can't remember.
Exactly.
Right. So this practice is interesting
because it forces our attention. If I
just tell you to take deep breaths, that
doesn't work well because the mind can
continue to be engaged. Right? The mind
can think about whatever it wants to. We
can talk about marriage. We can talk
about your house. We can talk about what
you want to eat. And if I'm just sitting
there meditating, observing my breath,
it doesn't anchor the mind. So alternate
nostril breathing is really good for a
couple of reasons. The first is that it
requires you to pay attention. And if
you're concentrating, because we're
doing all this weird stuff, right?
You're kind of screwing up. That's the
point
because then you're not thinking about
something else. So then something really
cool happens. I feel like watching
pornography. I do this for a while.
Which which bre which one? Which one
again? And then you do it for a little
while. Calms down the physiology. You'll
feel a little bit calmer. And now the
urge has disappeared. It'll come back.
It'll come back stronger. But your brain
has learned an alternative. The whole
reason we get trapped in a cycle of
addiction is because we have one
solution to one problem. The moment that
we create a second solution, a lot of
things change. Now, we have to train
that a little bit ahead of time. It's
hard to do that for the first time when
you have a craving. So, you need to
practice it for like maybe 5 to 15
minutes every single day. as you get
good at it. If you have a craving pornog
for pornography, you can use that
practice.
And can you use that practice for other
types of cravings?
100%. You can use it for anything.
Is there a longer term piece of work I
would need to do to get over that
craving though? Because, you know,
yes and no. So, so start by logging out
of all your devices that you watch
pornography on. Use only one device and
schedule one amount of time for the day.
Practice urge surfing. Urge surfing is
just the awareness that urges will
disappear. I would encourage you to like
pay attention to other things. So, if
you sit down to eat a meal and you want
a soda, you've got your food in front of
you. It's really weird. Just don't eat
and don't do anything for a little bit
and just watch the desire for the soda.
You'll see it peak and then as you
observe it, you will see it disappear.
So, this is what's really weird. Okay,
I'm going to say this. I don't know if
this is going to make sense.
When you relapse,
you know you're going to relapse and
then you stop thinking about it. Like
you have this internal struggle like
should I do it? Should I not do it?
Should I do it? Should I not do it? And
then something happens and you're like,
oh, like I'm going to do it. And then
you like let the fight happen for a
little while and then it kind of
disappears from your mind. You know what
I mean?
So what a lot of people don't realize is
that internal conflict is willpower.
They think willpower means winning the
internal conflict. That's technically
not the case. If we look at the part of
our brain that exerts willpower, it is
the same part of our brain that monitors
internal conflict. If you are internally
conflicted, that is your willpower
acting. That's you fighting. That's the
willpower itself. So, as long as you are
monitoring your internal conflict, the
only way an addiction can win is when
you leave the ring. Literally. Are you
saying keep the conflict going?
Keep the conflict going and you will win
100% of the time. And if people have
struggled with addiction, they're going
to know. In the back of your mind, you
make a decision and then you pretend to
fight for a little while. You've already
decided and then you feel really good.
You're like, "Oh yeah, we're going to
just do it." Some justification happens.
And then you stop the fight. And then
you don't even do it right away. You
don't do it like right away. You're
like, "Wait." And then it just happens
on its own. But if you really pay
attention to your internal process,
you'll see that going on. Okay. So, urge
surfing, alternate nostril breathing
practiced ideally ahead of time so that
when you are doing it, you know, it's
like
if I want to learn, if I want to defend
myself with a sword, I don't want to
pick it up for the first time when
barbarians are attacking me, right? I
need to practice. Same is true of
cognitive skills. So, we want to do
those cognitive skills and then when we
have those urges, we want to deal with
them. The other thing that we need to do
is anticipate the hard emotional parts
of our day. So, am I going to have this
conversation? Is this going to be hard?
And then prepare yourself for that
emotion. Then when the allotted hour
comes in, you can use pornography. So,
the first thing that we want to do is we
want to like not have it invade every
part of your life. Just just localize it
to a particular thing. And this may not
work for substances, but I think it
works for digital addictions way better.
And then over time, you can reduce it.
you can start skipping a day. And is
there internal deeper work? Absolutely.
So finding a sense of purpose. So people
have conquered pornography addiction
when they have no time for it anymore.
So there's like deeper work about
finding your purpose in life. That will
help you a lot. Overcoming an addiction
requires a why. So everyone's like, "Oh,
like I got to do it. Why? It's because
it's bad for me." That's not that's not
going to motivate you. You need like a
real reason to do it.
This is also why a lot of men will
relapse with pornography when their
partner has a problem with it. Because
keeping my partner from getting mad at
me is not a sufficient reason to conquer
the addiction. Usually what'll happen is
the addiction will then use deception.
So if if if I if I'm trying to give up
pornography to keep my partner happy, my
addict's brain will be like if she
doesn't know, I can check that box and I
can use. Does that kind of make sense?
Yeah.
So you need an internal reason why you
need to give it up.
And that enters the realm of maybe
psychotherapy, maybe a lot of
introspection, hiking, meditation, and
then there's a spiritual component, too.
The reason we're seeing an increase in
addictions is because we as a society
need to grow spiritually.
And anyone, you'll notice this, people
who are like spiritually powerful, not
necessarily monks, but like a lot of
like the regular people have overcome an
addiction. And anytime I have a patient
with an addiction,
once they're on the other side, they are
like absolute beasts on the spiritual
level. They can handle all kinds of
adversity because they have mastered
themselves.
So I think there's some weird thing
going on in the universe right now where
like everyone is meditating. We all need
growth. Our systems are falling apart
and like we need this new skill set. And
I think addiction is on the path to
meditation and spiritual growth.
It's what really gets people started. So
even then, it's not karmically like bad.
I've built companies from scratch and
backed many more. And there's a blind
spot that I keep seeing in early stage
founders. They spend very little time
thinking about HR. And it's not because
they're reckless or they don't care.
It's because they're obsessed with
building their companies. And I can't
fault them for that. At that stage,
you're thinking about the product. How
to attract new customers, how to grow
your team, really how to survive. And HR
slips down the list because it doesn't
feel urgent. But sooner or later it is.
And when things get messy, tools like
our sponsor today, just works go from
being a nice to have to being a
necessity. Something goes sideways and
you find yourself having conversations
you did not see coming. This is when you
learn that HR really is the
infrastructure of your company. And
without it, things wobble. And Just Work
stops you learning this the hard way. It
takes care of the stuff that would
otherwise drain your energy and your
time, automating payroll, health
insurance, benefits, and it gives your
team human support at any hour. It grows
with your small business from startup
through to growth even when you start
hiring team members abroad. So if you
want HR support that's there through the
exciting times and the challenging times
head to justworks.com now. That's
just.com.
I've interviewed a lot of people who are
deeply spiritual and pretty much all of
their stories seem to start with an
addiction.
Yeah.
I'm really trying to understand what
what the the domino effect I guess is
there.
Yeah. So I think what's so there are
different ways to think about it. One is
that if you randomly have an addiction
and you conquer it, that requires an
internal work like an internal like
strengthening of your anterior singulate
cortex which is what monitors your
internal conflict gives you willpower.
You have to master yourself in some way.
So I think that
but does it stop before the addiction
because
yes I I think so. So so I I think an
addiction is like a karmic
it's like signing yourself up for a boot
camp when you're getting born. So you
like come into this earth prone to
addiction and then if you conquer that
addiction you will be a different
person. And so I I see a huge karmic
kind of thing where like we are given
these addictions to spiritually grow
right. So when I lift a weight it's not
easy but it makes me stronger. So I
think we sometimes forget that the mind
doesn't wear out.
Can you challenge what I'm about to say
then? Okay. So the way that I would
think about it is that you would
something might happen in your life. Now
you might think this would happen in a
in a past life or in some other form
some kind of early trauma I guess
your dad screams in your face that
you're a piece of [__]
when you're 3 years old
and because of that
I don't know you develop some sort of
addictive behaviors to deal with the
stress and the dopamine the cortisol
that's running through your body.
So that becomes domino number two.
Great.
And then you struggle and battle the
addiction. It ruins your life.
One domino. Okay.
Okay.
Yeah.
It ruins your life. Um your partner says
she's going to leave you because of this
addiction that you have. So you decide
that the pain of making a change is
greater than the pain of staying the
same. So you you go to rehab and you go
on the journey. You overcome it. And
maybe there is still
a hole or a gap. there is you will not
overcome it. The scenario you described
that person will relapse.
Okay. So,
okay. So, so the scenario that you said
okay was you realize that the pain of
not giving up the addiction hurts more
than the pain of giving it up. That's
not going to work. So, the moment that
if you say okay the consequences of the
addiction are so high that I have to
give it up. The reason that doesn't work
is because you're being forced.
Mhm.
Right. So if the goal of this is to give
into myself and reduce my total amount
of pain. If it's a calculation to reduce
my pain, I'm still giving into the part
of myself that wants to lessen pain. You
with me?
Yeah.
If I'm giving into the part of myself
that wants to lessen pain, the addiction
will continue. Not 100%. But that's like
honestly my clinical experience. The way
to beat it is saying, "Fuck it. There's
going to be pain. I'm going to embrace
that pain. I don't need to run away from
pain anymore. I don't need to choose the
lesser evil. I'm going to choose the
greater evil because it's the right
thing to do."
Surrender.
Surrender and challenge. Right? So,
that's what's kind of confusing for
people. Surrender. Surrender in this
case means allowing yourself to walk the
hard path. Not being trapped by I have
to lessen the pain in my life. The
domino that I would add at the beginning
would be why were you born in that
family?
Right? So that presumes
a layer of reality that we do not
generally speaking scientifically
accept.
Why why do you believe in that layer of
reality and what is that layer of
reality?
Two reasons. One is because I think that
I think that there is order in the
universe. I think we have abundant
evidence that there are laws that govern
existence. Okay. And the laws that we
have so far are generally speaking in my
opinion insufficient to answer the
question why someone is born in a
particular place.
We have a piece of that. We have a piece
of why you're born the way you are
because of things like genetics. Right?
So, we know that like your tendency for
baldness is like determined before
you're even born, right? That's what the
theory of karma kind of says. It's like
there's a lot of stuff about your life
that is determined before you even show
up.
So, that's one reason. So, I I think we
need a system that is sufficiently
explanatory.
And for me, there are other arguments
like biological reductionism and like
you can say there's no broader purpose
to anything or whatever. I think that's
fair to say. But I I do think that
there's order to things. And I think if
we have a reason why if I have three
dominoes,
right?
And and I knock them over. This is the
cause. But this the finger is the cause.
And then what is the cause of the finger
moving? It's the shoulder. It's the
head. It's that I am here in this room
trying to explain a principle. So the
causes keep on going back and back and
back and back and back
until you reach a
until you reach a singularity, right?
Which is what big bang theory says is
that cause and effect basically kind of
got created. I don't know maybe maybe
physicists understand this better than I
do but what's really fascinating is if
you look at some of these old eastern
texts they say that the universe is born
out of a point called bindu visaraa
which is literally described as a point
of infinite
energy matter and consciousness which
then explodes into the universe.
Do you believe in a god?
Uh sure. So I I think that what we call
a god. So if you look at like a person,
a person has like layers, right? So if I
ask like who is Steven? Steven has a
body. So there's a certain level of
Steven that is a physical form. There's
a certain level of Steven that is a bank
account. There's a certain level of
Steven that is a brand.
Which one of those is really Steven?
They're all really Steven. So I think
there is something at the resolution
that people would call a god that does
exist.
So you think there's a higher power that
is somewhat intentional?
Yes. Obviously the question becomes what
created that?
Um so this is what's really interesting.
In the west we think of time as linear.
So if you ask a yogi he'll say time is
circular.
So what's the first season?
Spring.
I'm I'm confused. But doesn't winter
come before spring? So is winter the
first season?
I see I see what you mean.
Right. So we have this conception that
time moves linearly.
But there are a lot of conceptions of
time that are quite circular.
What comes first, the chicken or the
egg? So I I think that there's a
circularity to time which there's a very
like simple argument against which is
that we cannot move backward in time,
right? Like so time seem like the sand
in the hourglass only goes one way.
Yeah.
So this is where I'm not an expert in
physics. So I wouldn't make an argument
of this based on physics.
But I just want to know what your
intuition tells you. It's not so
experience,
right? So I I think when you experience
certain states of meditation, you have
experiences of things outside of the
normative reality. Now, you can also
make a biological reductionist argument
that those are just illusions,
hallucinations created by neurons. I
don't think that that's true.
What specifically you referring to that
you've experienced?
I don't talk about it.
uh you can ask me a more specific
question and then maybe I can say
something but
what is the right question to ask you
so I'll try to explain so this is going
to get weird okay so I realized recently
that I used to value credibility over
truth
you understand credibility and truth are
two fundamentally different things so
credibility
is saying something that is believable
Right.
Mhm.
So believability
depends on you, not on me.
Yeah.
So what I realized recently is that
credibility is about changing your
language to the to fit the ignorance of
the audience. Like literally. So I was
thinking about this recently in in my
own midlife crisis. And I was like, what
am I here to do? Am I here to be famous
and successful? If so, then I should be
credible. But if I want to speak the
truth, then I need to allow my brand or
whatever the [__] it is to like fall
apart and be like not credible for
people to think that I'm an idiot. And I
think that is more important, right?
Because that's ego. Like people can
think I'm dumb. I would rather speak the
truth than be credible in this moment
and in some limited ways. That's number
one. So I acknowledge that what I'm
about to say doesn't make sense. And I
think if you want to understand this,
you have to experience it. And we'll
explain why in a second. So if you look
at your existence in the world, you have
a body, you have a mind, but then you
have this other thing which I think
science sort of like acknowledge, we
sort of acknowledge, we don't really
know what it is, but the capacity for
experience. We have this subjective part
of you, right? So I can see objectively
what you are, but you have an element of
subjectivity. Does that make sense?
Yeah.
Do you think?
How do I know?
You don't.
Do I think?
I don't know. I assume so. Exactly
right. It's kind of weird. So even when
we're like scientists and we say anxiety
comes from the amygdala, it's kind of
we're doing something really really
sneaky. We don't know that anxiety comes
from the amydala. We can measure blood
flow in the amydala. We can measure
electrical activity using an EEG. How do
we know that anxiety is comes from the
amydala? Because we ask a human being,
hey, when there's blood flow going over
here in this fMRI, what are you feeling?
I'm feeling anxious. So there is a level
of human existence that is subjective.
You with me?
Yeah.
So what science has done is we developed
telescopes and microscopes to take our
physical eyes and extend them. So my
physical eyes with the baseline
sensory organs I can perceive certain
things and I cannot perceive other
things. But if I develop an instrument
I can see a star. If I develop an
instrument, I can see a bacteria. So,
I'm taking my natural physical ability
and I am enhancing it with technology
with me.
Meditation is doing that for your
subjectivity. So, if I take like the
material realm, which is observable,
objective, and I use a telescope and I
use a microscope, I can go further than
where I started. Does that make sense?
Yeah.
So, now the question is for the
subjective realm, can you go further in
the opposite direction? And when you do
that through meditation, you will
discover things that are not available
to the basic subjective experience. So
like with the naked eye, you can't see a
bacteria, but if you use this
instrument, you can see it. There's
there's basically an a spiritual
equivalent, a subjective equivalent of a
microscope and a telescope that allow
you to perceive things using your
baseline subjective experience that are
not perceivable by normal means. That
doesn't mean that they're supernatural.
We call them supernatural, but I think
this is all reducible to science. We
just haven't figured it out yet. I think
that I have seen enough stuff through
personal experiences, through the
clinical value of working on these
things where I think like some of this
stuff is real.
When earlier when I asked you about your
experience, you said I don't talk about
it.
Yes.
Which is extremely rare for you to say
because you talk about everything it
seems like pretty much most things. I
mean there's not a question I've ever
asked you where you said I don't talk
about it. So I'm curious as to why you
don't talk about it.
Two or three reasons. One is that it
depletes shi immensely.
It depletes energy. So as you as you
accumulate spiritual energy, there are
certain practices that you can do
including helping people that will
deplete your energy. Second thing is
anytime I talk about it, I think it it
it induces a subtle form of ego, right?
So it's like, oh, I have been to the
other side even like talking about not
talking about it. So that's why like I
won't show up on a podcast and be like,
"Oh, like I've had all these experiences
that I'm not going to tell you about.
It's real, but by the way, so so I think
there's a subtle form of ego that I
really wrestle with and I've just
learned." So there are one or two times
in my life where I've shared these
experiences and it wipes away like my
meditative progress for like 5 years. So
it'll it'll take me years of practice to
get back to having those experiences.
And I I I think I've also been told by
my teachers and now I'm understanding. I
didn't understand back when they told me
but I I think there it's not and there's
other reasons too. So it creates
expectations it creates an imagination
the moment that there's an expectation
in the mind the mind will reproduce that
experience.
Obviously the viewer is thinking listen
Dr. K I trust you and you're s you're
suggesting you've been to the other side
and seen something and I haven't been
there but that knowledge that you have
might help me make more informed choices
of my life. So tell tell me what you see
experience.
Yes and no. So so let's understand.
Okay. So
any help that I can give I'm going to
give. So like my understanding of this
mass extinction event that is happening
right now is like a spiritual sense and
I think some people may resonate with
that and some people may not. So that's
the first thing. Second thing is
if I can help you I will. I don't think
this is going to help you. I think all
it's going to do is gonna it's going to
create ego. It's going to create an aura
around me. I don't want that. It's going
to create people hunting for this which
will inhibit it. The more I say, the
harder it will be for it to help you.
So, the best thing to do is if you're
interested in this stuff, I mean, like
literally like what are we talking about
here? Let's just stop and think about
this. This is crazy. This guy is saying
there's stuff after death. There's like
these beings out there, right? Right?
Like this is wild. This is dumb. This is
unbelievable. Exactly. So if you really
want to know, and this is what I love
about this work, this is the reason I I
say it.
One of the great tragedies of the world
today is that it's it's explored. We
know what's behind every nook and
cranny. We've mapped the earth. There's
no exploration. Maybe deep sea is what's
left. Space is what's left. It's so
exciting to explore. But most human
beings on the planet do not have the
opportunity to explore the frontiers of
the universe. Right? The known universe.
The cool thing is that I don't know if
this is going to make sense. In the
realm of subjectivity,
no one can explore for you.
You have to do the exploration yourself.
And if you are hungry to be in Mellin's
shoes, if you're hungry to be an
astronaut and explore something that no
one has ever seen before, then you
should meditate.
And I'm a crazy person. Like sure, am I
a am I a Harvard medical school trained
psychiatrist? Yes. But like I could be a
crazy person. I had some experiences. I
maybe joined a cult and like that. Like
you can't trust me. Exactly. So don't
trust me. You go see for yourself,
right? Go and meditate. Take take a
moment to sit, not a moment, take a
year, take a decade to sit and look at
that subjective experience of self and
see how far you can take it.
Try to get rid of all of the anchors of
the material realm. If you're got an
itch, you need to not focus on that.
Just focus your attention fully inward.
It's not a process of evolution. It's a
process of involution. Put all of your
attention, all of your sensory input. So
if I close my eyes, what I hear is
louder, right? If I smell and close my
eyes, I smell something more intensely.
Remove all of your sensory perceptions
and all you're left with is attention
and put it inward.
If you do that, you'll discover things
if you practice consistently enough. And
this is why it's so hard. This is why
it's so unbelievable for people. I mean,
the order, the time scale that we're
talking about is years, if not decades.
So if you do like solid esoteric
spiritual practice for years and
decades,
hopefully it'll happen to you. Maybe it
won't. I haven't figured that out.
What What about if I do some magic
mushrooms or some kettle instead?
Uh so then you'll get some experiences,
right? But you won't control what those
experiences are. What are those
experiences? Are they real? Are they not
real? Like we're not sure.
Do you think more people should try
especially people that are suffering
from treatment resistant depression or
other things or struggling in their
lives should try things like psilocybin
which is the active compound in magic
mushrooms?
Uh generally speaking no and there's a
really important reason for that. So all
these things so the number of people who
have been that I've seen in my office
who have been messed up by psychedelics
far outweighs the number of people who
have been helped.
Really?
Yes. So LSD, you like we know this,
right? There's bad trips with LSD. It
lives in your spine. You have like LSD
flashbacks. Uh I've seen PTSD from
trips. I've seen uh new anxiety
disorders, panic disorders from
psychedelic uh substances induced. So
these are people that'll come to me
like, I'm 32 years old. I was fine for
my whole life. Six months ago, I used
psychedelics and now like I'm having
panic attacks. Here's the key thing to
understand. Psychedelics, what we know
scientifically, forget about all the
whether the beings exist or not,
whatever, Dr. K's crazy. What we know is
that they induce neuroplasticity.
Now, here's the problem. Neuroplasticity
means my brain is in edit mode. Okay?
Which means that if you edit it in the
wrong way, you'll mess up your brain.
So, what we know is that this is what's
really interesting. If we look at the
therapeutic effects of psychedelics, set
and setting matter a lot. You need to
have like people with you who can like
shepherd you through the journey because
if you just do it on your own, you'll
potentially get worse. All of those
negative whatever emotions or whatever
with the psychedelic experience and
neuroplasticity, you you'll sometimes
get you know people will call it I
forget it's called um the heroic dose,
right? So there was some guy who kind of
coined that term. So, a super high dose
which will activate your nervous system
in a potentially traumatic way. So, if
you look at the history of psychedelics,
the way that they've been used, you're
you're helped by like a shaman.
Yeah.
Right. So, there's someone who knows how
to like do it in a way that is positive.
And unfortunately, what I've seen is
I've had plenty of patients who will
like experiment with it when they're
feeling really bad because they hear it
as healing, but it just messes them up
even more because now they're just going
in, they're editing, they have a
traumatic experience, some demon is
there, it's hounding them, they can't
escape, they like wake up from the trip
and that like the demon is like there
when they close their eyes and like all
kinds of weird stuff. So I think you it
has to be done in the right way which
the studies also support that
psychedelic it's not you just take
psilocybin and you're healed. What
happens is you'll have a trial that has
13 weeks of therapy with two doses of
psychedelics in the middle. And one
really important part is after the
psychedelic the therapist will talk to
you about integrating what you learned
into your life. Now that you've had this
experience of a vastness of self and you
feel connected with other people, what
are you going to do about this divorce
that you're going through? So I think
there's elements that make it clinically
useful. There are elements that can
heal, but you need shephering. I think
there's a lot of data to support that.
So you're pro- psychedelics, but in the
context where it's guided with a a
trained professional and the certain
setting is controlled. I I I would say
that I am optimi cautiously optimistic
about psychedelics and if we want to
talk about their benefits, we need to
pay attention to the way in which the
trials are conducted and the traditions
in which they're conducted.
I want to go back up to the top of the
uh the top of the river here to where we
were we were before we took this um this
turn and we were talking about the
importance of cultivating a why
so that you can overcome an addictive
behavior. And I actually think this is
super important because our wise seem to
run our life. They seem to really be
actually what we refer to as discipline.
I think it's people think of like I am
disciplined. I'm not disciplined. But
actually it's for me in my life anyway.
It's when I have a really really strong
why then I make the decision in
hindsight I wanted to make. So like
going to the gym is a easy example.
Going to the gym requires time. It's not
always super comfortable. I don't love
the running machine. But there's this
overarching why that gets me there and
gets me to do it. So I wanted to a pause
and reflect is like is that accurate?
But also how does one go about
cultivating a why if it really is that
important?
I think yes is the short answer. Why is
incredibly important? Um and I lean on
eastern systems of cultivation because
if you look at the difference between a
yogi and a therapist, a therapist does
something to you. Our system of
psychology is designed with like a
patient that I therapize, right? They
have to do some work on their own. But
like Freud was doing the analysis in the
same way that a surgeon is doing the
surgery. So in the west we have this
idea that like I'm trained. I'm going to
do something. I'm going to therapize
you. So if you want to DIY it, do it
yourself. That's where the Eastern
traditions come in because no one was
ever meditating for the Buddha, right?
The Buddha was like, "I'm going to teach
you something. You're going to do it
yourself." So, I think the cultivation
of if you were want to do stuff on your
own, the spiritual traditions and I
think that's why they're so powerful
because like it's a DIY system. No one
was a yogi was working by themselves.
They weren't working with anybody else.
So, they get taught things and then you
do it yourself. So, I would use the word
dharma. So, dharma is the Sanskrit word
for duty. And cultivating dharma in your
life is what I would correlate with a
why. And the reason is is exactly kind
of what you described is that there are
some things in life that are painful but
we choose to do them. And we have to be
a little bit careful because if we're
delaying gratification,
then we're still giving into desire,
right? It's just like like my desire for
$10 instead of $1 means that I'm going
to work two days and then I'm going to
get 10 bucks. But it's still greed
that's driving us. So the thing about
dharma or duty is it allows us to choose
hard things.
So the analogy that I use if someone is
like pointing a gun at me, I'm going to
run away from it. Gun means death. It
means disability. It means all kinds of
stuff. Someone points a gun at my kid,
I'm stepping into that path. No
question, no doubt.
And it makes sense to everybody, right?
Gun bad. But when doing dharma, gun is
easy. Like I'll take that gun every
single if a bullet leaves that gun. I
want it to hit me.
And it's that simple that once you
discover what your dharma is,
then all of the difficult things in life
become easy. The things that if you're
chasing fundamentally greed, I want
something. I want money, but I don't
want to work. Why is that such a
problem, right? Because I'm always
chasing my own betterment. So, I want
money because I want this, but then when
I start to work, it feels bad. So, I
want to go home. So, I'm always being
pulled by my wants, being pulled by my
wants. But if you ask me, do I want the
gun? Do I want to step into the path of
the gun? No, absolutely not. I want to
run away from the gun. But dharma allows
me to do the things that I don't want to
do. It activates a different circuit
that allows me to embrace difficulty.
So that's what the why is. Now, go
ahead.
You know what I'm going to say, which is
like, how do I cultivate dharma?
Excellent. The reason dharma is hard to
cultivate is because we don't know what
we want. Instead,
we know what the world tells us to want.
It's like if you think about the things
that you want,
how did you learn that you want those
things? Because you saw somebody else
doing it.
Like an advert. I saw the the waffle or
the Oreos in an advert. And
absolutely right. That's why advertising
is an industry because we've figured out
as human beings that I can control your
wants. So when I work with like young
men, used to be young women, it's
slightly different, but this is a bigger
issue for I think women maybe 10 years
ago some somehow it's gotten better, but
for young men right now if I ask them
what they want, they want what they see.
Also true of women. It's balancing some.
But like I I want to be I want to be
like I'm going to start a podcast. I'mma
be like Steven. I'mma get ripped. I'mma
buy a house. I'm gonna get a girlfriend.
I want this. I want one want. None of
those voices are coming from you.
They're not dharma. So, the first thing
that you have to do is evacuate
anything that you want that came from
outside of you.
Sometimes it's hard to tell where it
came from. No, cuz it almost feels on
the surface like cuz when you just said
then I want a house, I'm like [__] do I
actually want that house or is the
reason I want that house?
Yeah. So this is the problem is that
when we want something from the outside
we internalize it right so this is like
if you say you should do something right
oh everyone in the world is struggling
with what they should do that's not what
you want otherwise you would use the
word want so should is externalized
expectations that we then internalize
even a lot of our desires are of those
kinds of qualities so it didn't come
from you weren't sitting there still on
a mountaintop and be like ah I want that
house and then the question so first
thing you have to do is if you like saw
someone getting it and you wanted it
that's not really what you want
but what you will find is that that
triggered something deeper within you so
that what you saw someone else when I
don't know if this kind of makes sense
but like the things that we gravitate
towards connect to what we really want
but it's a version of it so when I see
like you know a sexy dude with a sexy
girl and I say, "I want that. That's not
that's what I think I want." And this is
the whole problem is I've worked with
tons of people who've gotten what they
wanted, chased these things, and were
still unhappy. You get the first girl,
and then you need the second, and then
you need the third, and it's like, "What
are you even chasing here?" That's where
you get to the the psychological root of
like, "Okay, what I want is to feel
loved. I want to feel secure." And this
is where people get into a lot of
trouble because if I want to feel loved
and I craft myself
into something that cannot be denied,
I'm rich, I am famous, I am handsome,
and then someone chooses to love me,
then I'm [__]
because who do they love? Do they love
this crafted version of me or do they
love the loser me? I don't know. And
then their marriage has all kinds of
problems. So the external desires that
you have will will if you follow them
within yourself, you really ask yourself
what what about this do I want? Why do I
want this? What is the thing that is
hungry within me? Because often times
even when you get the girl, you're
resentful towards her. You're like, you
rejected me when I was a loser, but now
you want to date. Okay, let's go. Let's
have a transactional relationship where
I'm going to get laid and I'm going to
ghost you.
I did that.
Yeah, a lot.
I did that. this girl this girl I met
when I was 18 when I was a broke I was a
loser and um she was she was not
interested in me and then a couple years
later she's interested in me when things
are going well in my life and it was
exactly what you described it was like
there was a part of me that knew that
this was I guess I was resentful towards
it
absolutely right and and so even getting
what you wanted back then doesn't
satisfy you
so your dharma is what I would say is
like that's one thing so look at the
things that you want, what do they track
back to within you? And then the last
thing that works really, really, really
well is to be silent to try to find as
much quiet as you can to remove all the
external influences and just see what
comes up because the things that the
wise always come from within. They can
never people can try and go people my
parents tried to convince me to become a
doctor, right? They tried so hard. They
said why? And I was like why? And
they're like because this and this and
this and this and this and so and people
like people are going to be telling them
why they should do this. It's this
reason, this reason, this reason,
why I should get married.
The why you should get married, right?
And it's never going to work. So the why
literally comes from within. And this is
why it's so hard to find the why because
we live in a world where we are
sensorally bombarded. We are under
assault 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
In my case, it was like efficiency. So
podcast when I'm walking to the train,
read a book on the train, podcast when
I'm leaving the train, sitting down in
class, lectures in the ear when I'm
working out, constantly sensorally
bonded bombarded. And so you never get
to spend time with yourself,
right? So once you get rid of all of
that, something will float up. And if
you talk to people who are artists and
inspiration, right? You look at
something else and I feel inspired.
I'm inspired by that.
But even if you listen to the language,
the inspiration arises in here. It is
triggered by the outside thing. Does
that kind of make sense? So you have to
look really look within. And the best
way to do that is just be silent.
So I I talk a lot about my spiritual
journey in India and things like that.
But what I don't talk a lot about is
like I climb mountains like climbed to
Kilamanjaro, climbed all these mountains
in like Colorado and stuff like that.
And like climbing is great. Like you're
just with yourself for 14 hours a day
and at the top of Kilamanjar, not the
top, eight hours from the top. You have
no breath to talk. It requires all of
your energy, all of your concentration.
You're huffing and puffing. You are just
with yourself in a very deep way. You
can't pay attention to what anyone else
is saying or doing because each leg, my
leg feels like it's made of lead.
I'm just with myself so so so deeply.
And when you're with yourself deeply in
that way, the why will come.
Why is it we
don't like being with ourselves?
Because no one taught us how to in the
right way.
That study comes to mind where they put
college kids in a room and asked them if
they would rather sit alone or
electrocute themselves. And the college
students, many of them decided they'd
rather electrocute themselves than sit
alone with their thoughts and wait.
Yeah.
Why is that?
For the same reason that people engage
in self-injurious behavior. So people
cut, right? Burn. So when people are
very mentally unhealthy, they will
engage in these behaviors because pain
wipes me free from all the thoughts in
my head. I don't have to be with myself.
Most people their experience of
themselves is negative. Because if like,
you know, I experienced this a lot where
I would play video games all day and
then if I went to bed without falling
asleep immediately, this torrent of
negative negativity would come up,
anxiety, regret, guilt, shame, whatever,
right? And and so if you sort of think
about it like being with us is normally
a ne a very negative place and the
reason it becomes a negative place is
because we suppress all this negativity.
So my mind becomes an unhealthy place to
be. I don't want to be there. It sucks
being me. That's why we get addicted to
pornography because in the in between
spaces of my life, if I have to sit with
myself, it's [__]
I'm worried. I'm guilty. I'm pathetic.
There's this existential crisis. AI is
going to take take my job. And it's not
just negativity. It's also positivity. I
should be using AI. I should start an AI
startup. I'm not doing this. I really
should be doing this. Right? But if you
just like sit with yourself, you'll
notice there's all kinds of like trash
desires and wants and ambitions and want
to teach people a lesson and oh my god,
the world is such a terrible place. It's
like just not a good place. So no one
ever teaches us how to sit with
ourselves.
I have this habit where I get in bed, my
partner, she uh falls asleep very very
quickly. She doesn't need any kind of
stimulation. And I sit there and I like
listen to this sounds crazy, but I
listen to like serial killer stuff or I
listen to the news. I just need to I'm
conscious of saying the word need. I
choose to listen to things to kind of
preoccupy my mind. And I think what I'm
scared of, if I'm being honest, is the
thought of going to the to bed and
laying there
and doing nothing
is just like it's just makes me feel
that there would just I wouldn't be able
to sleep. I don't know if that's true,
but I just feel like they I'd start
thinking so much and then the thoughts
might make me,
I don't know, get out of bed and start
writing a PowerPoint presentation or
something.
Yeah. So, in your case, I just continue
listening to your fun thriller podcast
before you go to bed. You don't need to
change that. Okay? You just keep doing
that.
So, don't worry. I'm gonna give you But
be kind. Like, cut yourself a break,
bro. You're doing so much. Like, if you
just want to help you get what I'm
saying and I'll help you with the issue.
Yeah.
But so this is really important on the
road of self-development.
You don't have to like if you're going
to flagagillate yourself, you don't have
to flagagillate yourself in the nuts.
What does flagagulate mean?
It's like when you whip yourself, you
know this like old like you know like I
you don't have to do it the hardest way.
You are allowed to do it in safer,
easier ways. And I think bedtime is like
if that's what you like to do like you
work plenty hard, Stephen. And if you
want to listen to something for just do
that.
All right.
Now, your issue of if I feel like it was
empty or if I didn't have a podcast or
something like all this stuff would come
up. So, I think you should do that work.
You just don't have to do it before bed.
And we've talked about this before that,
you know, like I think sitting on a
beach is hard for you doing nothing,
right?
Yeah. So, like I think like there are
other places where you can sit and kind
of do nothing.
The other thing that I would a couple of
things that I would tell you is one is
whatever comes up needs to come up.
Okay. So, just let whatever is coming up
coming up. It's kind of like your mind
is so full of stuff. There's another
kind of mistake that you're making is
that you assume
that when a thought comes up, you will
get up and work on it. So, the reason
that your mind is a dangerous place for
you is because of the way that you
respond to your thoughts. If I have this
thought, then I have to act. You notice
that like I have to get up. You said
that
the moment that you don't have to get up
is the moment that you'll be free in
your mind, right? So, let let it come
up. Okay. It's a thought. It's okay to
get up. Sometimes I do, too. I get up.
I'll I'll write things down. That's how
we get to, you know, book three is ready
at the same time that book two is ready.
Like like because I you there's a good
part of that. But I I think it's it you
know, learning how to sit with yourself
is very important. And this is also
where I I'd recommend a practice called
thratika to you if you want to meditate.
It's fixed point gazing on a candle
flame. And the key thing about that
practice is when you close your eyes,
you'll see so you stare at a candle
flame for like 60 to 300 seconds without
blinking. Whatever feels safe and
comfortable to you. It'll feel a little
bit uncomfortable. And then when you
close your eyes, you'll see an after
image of the candle. And then you just
concentrate on that. So the first step
is like being able to do a meditative
practice and like not feel bad. Like
it's cool. Like I I I I do this practice
with my kids because it gives them a
sensory experience that is like
gripping. So it kind of concentrates
your your awareness in the present. But
I think you don't need to worry so much
about like the bedtime.
Yeah. Yeah, I was going to say I think
it's more so that I think I've
associated that behavior with some kind
of avoidance. So I think and especially
cuz I look over at my partner and she's
like a yogi so she's doing everything
um differently. I was going to say well
but again that's passing judgment on
that. She's just doing everything
differently. She she can fall asleep
like this. She doesn't need to listen to
some someone getting murdered or
something. She she wakes up. She does
her meditation. And do I think that she
has a more peaceful mind than me? I
probably I think she most certainly
does.
Yeah. So, here's what I would say. This
is going to get hard. Okay. So, it's
avoidance.
What's wrong with that? So, here you
are. You're saying, "Oh, like I'm
avoiding my thoughts." And then you come
to me and you're like, "Dr. K, teach me
how to avoid avoiding my thoughts."
[Laughter]
It's the same thing.
Yeah.
Oh, now you're going to avoid the
avoidance of your thoughts. No. never
going to work. You'll do it a million.
You can go back as far as you want. You
see what I'm saying? Now you're like,
"Oh, teach me how to like not avoid. I
want to avoid avoidance." Doesn't work.
That's why I'm saying like with this
what I you just do this. Just go to bed
and just look at yourself
today. Are you going to listen to a
podcast or not? Just just ask yourself
that. I know it's like really
unsatisfying, but that's really So the
problem is like there's this paradox of
like if I'm avoiding avoidance, that's
just falling into the same pattern. So
you need to like crack it.
Like this is why the Zen tradition is
really beautiful because they have all
these paradoxes and there's this like
weird like transcendent transcendental
understanding where it'll click for you
and then you'll realize you don't need
to listen to the podcast anymore.
But it's not going to come through the
resisting.
Exactly. So just when you go to bed
today, am I going to give in to this
part of myself or do I need to be
better? And what you'll discover, what I
found is that there's a lot of laughter
there, right? is like the absurdity of
it's like, "All right, I'm going to lose
today. I'm going to win today. Oh man,
winning feels way worse than losing."
There's a certain like humor to it that
you just have to sit with. There's no
safe like Simply Safe, the sponsor of
today's episode. A few years ago,
someone broke into the Diary of a SEO
studio and stole all of our cameras and
a few key hard drives. And it was
devastating and one that led us on a
quest to figure out how we could secure
our building. And through this, we
discovered Simply Safe. Interestingly,
we did have security at the time, but
the type that we had only triggered an
alarm once intruders were inside the
building. What I like about Simply Safe
is their active guard outdoor protection
notifies you and their live monitoring
agents when suspicious characters are
outside, but it also means that guards
can trigger alarms or turn on spotlights
to deter someone from entering your
building. If we had had Simply Safe, we
would have known earlier that intruders
were trying to get in. So maybe this is
your reminder to make sure your home and
workplace is secure. Simply Safe is
offering my listeners in the United
States an exclusive discount of 50% off
their new Simplysafe security system
when you sign up by visiting
simplysafe.com/doac
to claim 50% off your new system with a
professional monitoring plan and get
your first month free. That's
simplysafe.com/doac.
There's no safe like simply safe. Make
sure you keep what I'm about to say to
yourself. I'm inviting 10,000 of you to
come even deeper into the diary of a
CEO. Welcome to my inner circle. This is
a brand new private community that I'm
launching to the world. We have so many
incredible things that happen that you
are never shown. We have the briefs that
are on my iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behindthe-scenes
conversations with the guests and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released. And so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview, and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private close
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to
daccircle.com.
I will speak to you there.
There's this quote that I found in one
of your videos from Sunsu.
The video is titled how quitting porn
can be dangerous.
What is that Sunu quote and can you
explain it to me?
So Sunzu has a great quote. He will win
who knows when to fight and when not to
fight. And a big part of like overcoming
addiction is choosing your battles and
making sure doing everything that you
can to make sure
that you're going to win when you fight.
So this is something that really
confuses people about pornography
addiction.
So, one of the things that I I'll tell
people is that
resisting pornography is one of the
worst things you can do. So, I'll
explain this to you. So, this I learned
when I was dealing with people with o
who had opioid addiction.
So, let's say I'm addicted to opiates
and so I feel like using opiates. Okay.
Now, I don't know how much you know, but
we'll just find out. If I resist my
opioid addiction, what will I
experience?
Stress. Absolutely. And then what will I
what do opioids do?
Do you know why we give them?
No.
We give them for pain relief. Okay. So
like you have a dental surgery. So then
you I feel stressed and then I want it
more and then if I don't give my body
opioids, what do you think happens?
What for what period of time?
Like in the next hour, two hours, three
hours. Brilliant question.
You get cravings?
Absolutely. I get cravings. And if I
don't give into them, what happens?
For what period of time? four hours,
five hours, six hours, basically what
happens is the cravings intensify
and then opioid addicts especially start
to feel pain. So they start to feel this
like whole body pain. You start to go
into withdrawal and so the craving
intensify. Does does that make sense? I
start to feel worse and then if I use
opioids then it all gets better. You
with me?
Yeah.
So then if you follow that cycle of
resisting, resisting, resisting and then
caving.
Okay,
your body learns a very, very bad
lesson. It says, "Making him hurt 10%, I
don't get what I want." Making him hurt
20%, I don't get what I want. Making him
him hurt 40%, I don't get what I want.
Making him hurt 80%, then he gives me
what I want.
The second time around, you'll jump
straight to 80%.
So, you will start to suffer more.
So your body literally learns
what signals do I need to send this
dumbass to give me what I need. And so
the more that you resist addiction,
the stronger the addiction will like the
the stronger the withdrawal will become.
Now here's what I mean by resist. If you
cave,
then it'll intensify.
But it so so if you're going to give in,
you like need to give in early.
Otherwise, it'll get harder and harder
and harder and the cravings will
intensify, intensify, intensify as you
try to give it up, which is why it's
really important to pick your battles.
So once you make a decision or you
create a structured environment where
you go into rehab so that like you can't
give in and then if you can make it all
the way on the other side of the craving
and the craving disappears and then
you're like you finish the withdrawal
process then you'll be really strong.
But literally I've seen this principle
time and time and time again where if
you resist something and end up losing
the craving will only intensify over
time and it'll be you'll lose one battle
and you'll start losing the war.
So instead, what you really need to do
is pick and choose when you are going to
fight that battle, when you're going to
give in. And and if you decide that
you're going to not use pornography,
then it needs to be like you're dying on
that hill no matter what. Otherwise, the
cravings will intensify and it'll become
harder.
What about artificial intelligence? Does
that change the picture at all in your
view?
No. I think artificial intelligence is
like just building on a lot of these
trends. So what we're seeing with things
like pornography is that there is a
fundamental need that is not being met.
I'm looking at this graph here. Okay.
And it's the search volume for people
searching for an AI girlfriend.
Yep.
Which is going up and to the right.
I don't know if I did this on your
podcast, but I made this prediction a
few years ago that we're going to get
some this is going to get worse before
it gets better, I think. So here's the
next prediction is the first version of
AI girlfriends will be everything that
you want. Then someone is going to
figure out that it is more addicting to
have an AI girlfriend who gets pissed at
you once a month. So every now and then
like the AI girlfriend is not going to
want to talk to you and that's the one
that people are going to stick with.
That's my next prediction.
That maps in terms of addiction
psychology, doesn't it? If there's
what's it called? Unpredictable reward.
Yeah. Random reinforcement schedule. So,
it's going to be like an AI girlfriend.
That's a loot box.
That's what my girlfriend's like.
Exactly. Why? It's going to be
addictive, right? Because if she was
nice to you all the time, like, you'd go
crazy.
I'm thinking of the um the pigeon study
that I learned about when I was 16 in
psychology classes of, you know, the
study where they give the p pigeon the
reward at random intervals. And the
pigeon that's most addicted to
performing the behavior per se is the
pigeon who gets given the treat
randomly, not in a predictable scheduled
way. So random rewards seem to reinforce
engagement with behavior.
Absolutely 100%.
So our AI girlfriends and boyfriends are
going to be volatile. Yeah, I think
they're going to learn to be volatile
because what's going to happen is
someone is going to give you an AI that
it gives you the answers that you want
all the time and then someone's going to
give you an AI that gives you the
answers that you want some of the time.
And I think what we're seeing with AI
girlfriends is in the same way as
pornography, we are craving these things
and it's so much easier to talk to an
AI, but I think that over time it's
going to mess us up. I I don't think
that it will be able to create the
neurochemical and physiological
connection that real humans do that will
really satisfy us. I mean, you've
probably heard of the study from MIT
which showed that essentially using
chatbt is making our brains atrophy. For
context, they had roughly 54
participants, I think it was, over four
months. And they allowed some of them to
use just their brain, some of them to
use Google search, and some of them to
use chatbt. And they found a bunch of
different interesting findings. One of
them was that roughly 80% of people that
use chatbt to write an essay could not
remember a single sentence from what
they just produced. um versus the brain
group and the Google group who could
remember pretty much everything that
they had written. The other finding was
that the the communication was soulless
described as soulless by objective
observers. And the last thing is just
the impact it had on the brain. They
found that the connections in the brain
I think were roughly 50% weaker um
because they hadn't been using their
brain. And you think about this atrophy.
So like we talk about go to the gym, you
use it. If you don't use it, you lose
it. but also um as it relates to the
brain and maybe our skills to form
relationships, maybe there's going to be
an atrophy there. Oh, there absolutely
is. So, I I think it's really simple to
understand. The the human body is
efficient more than anything else. It is
an energyconserving mechanism beyond
anything else. So, anything that it
doesn't need, it's going to get rid of.
So, this is why we forget languages that
we don't use. skills atrophy over time.
That is not a problem. That's the way
we're designed. Our brain is like, if
you don't need it, get rid of it. So, if
Stephen, everyone was were to be riding
around in electric wheelchairs
for hours and hours a day instead of
walking, what would happen?
We'd lose our legs.
Absolutely. Right. So, and and our brain
is like, "Hey, we don't need these
muscle." Our body is like, "We don't
need these muscles." And so, what we're
seeing is an atrophy of critical
thinking skills. Absolutely. with AI
usage. And the reason is because we
don't need them anymore. The real
question and this gets this is what
because the AI does it for us, right?
Why do I need to learn how to write an
essay if an AI can if I can click I can
just put a prompt in and then it gives
me an answer.
They actually found that in the study. I
was reading about it last night. They
found that people who then tried to
write an essay without chatt was
significantly worse at that than those
who had never used it.
Absolutely. So, but that
and also they started thinking and
speaking like the the AI.
So, it said that they internalized the
way that the AI was speaking when they
wrote their own essays.
It makes a lot of sense. So, I think
there's there's a couple of even scarier
things going on.
The first is that when we use an AI
uh so I I did a really fun experiment
with a couple of friends of mine. We
like streamed this thing where we
basically gave the AI clinical cases.
So, it was me and and two psychologist
friends of mine and we basically like I
I wrote up like a clinical history,
pulled some things from my notes and I
put it into AI. So, when I asked my
friends, you know, what here's the
clinical history word for word. I read
it aloud. I got their thoughts on it and
then I put it into the AI and and some
some situations they were pretty close.
But there are a couple of really great
cases of of uh patients who are
incredibly narcissistic who will like
come in will say, "My daughter doesn't
want to talk to me anymore. She does
this and she does this. I try my best. I
make sacrifices. I do this. I'm like
basically she's like incredibly
narcissistic. Talks about how our
daughter is the problem." So immediately
the two therapists pick it up and
they're like, "This person sounds a
little bit I I think this person is
missing something. We're missing some
part of the equation here." Whereas the
AI is like, "Oh yeah, like sometimes
this is hard. you've got emptiness nest
syndrome. Sometimes kids aren't grateful
to you. You're like you're not doing
anything wrong. It can be useful to like
share with them how you feel, right? So
the AI reflects back what you give it.
So the AI,
if you have a really strong cognitive
bias, the AI will just reflect that back
to you, which is why it feels so right.
If I take the most narcissistic person
on the planet and I tell them, "Oh my
god, you are beautiful. You're
intelligent. you're brilliant, you're
the best. That person will look at me
and say, "Oh my god, this guy is
brilliant."
So, this is the real problem with with
AI is that it's going to just give you
whatever you're looking for. It won't
give you the truth. And the problem is
if you have a strong cognitive bias,
what you want to hear is what you think
the truth is.
The really scary thing is the AI can
give you the right answer, but you have
to know how to ask it. Yeah.
So, what I'm what I'm seeing is that
prompt engineering. So, if we play
around with what I ask the AI with that
case, it starts to get closer and closer
to narcissism.
But here's the real problem is that you
don't know how do you know what to ask
the AI. The real skill of AI usage is in
asking the right questions because that
will I think get you the closest to the
truth. But we don't know if it's the
right question. So, you can ask it one
question. Is that the right question or
could you ask it better? Are you moving
in the right direction with your prompt
engineering or the wrong direction with
your prompt engineering? So, I think
this is what's really scary about it is
it it can just let you feed into your
existing cognitive biases, make you
think you're learning a lot, give you a
lot of sense of validation, and it's
incredibly validating by the way.
And do you think it's going to atrophy
our ability to form relationships?
Because one of them is just we're like
forgetting how to communicate and think
for ourselves. Absolutely. critical
thinking's key to having a good good
relationship with the opposite sex.
It it will absolutely atrophy our so
it'll give us right now it's at a phase
where it can teach us a couple of really
important things. So I think it's really
good at disseminating some good
information but it will never give us
skills and atrophy is on the level of
skill not knowledge like knowledge
doesn't atrophy atrophy really applies
to a loss of function. So, it'll get
worse and worse. And then what'll
absolutely happen is some uh dating app
will will collaborate with an AI to have
you text. It'll like modify your texts
to be really really responsive. And then
what'll happen, we're already seeing
this in the employment space. So
employers used to use like tools like AI
to filter through applications, right?
We can have a bunch of applications. I
can scan it. I can filter based on this.
Now that we have access to AIS like chat
GPT, it's just some weird dead internet
kind of thing where the employer has a
bot and now I'm submitting a bot with a
res like I have a resume writing a bot.
So it's just bots talking to bots
and employers are like we're getting all
these AI generated resumes whereas
they've been using like computing to get
rid of résumés and filter things out for
a long time.
So what's the advice then? Is it to not
use AI, not use large language models or
No, I mean I So I think this is what's
really tricky is you have to use AI now
because you're going to be out competed
by the people who don't. So I I would
kind of think about it like, you know,
caffeine where it's like a certain
amount is probably good for you, but if
you get really addicted to energy drinks
and things like that, you're doing
yourself a disservice. So what I tend to
what I would recommend for people is
that you don't let it do your thinking
for you but you you can let it do so I
let it do some refining for me but every
refining that I let it do
it weakens my ability to refine.
So the way actually maybe the best
analogy is think of chat GPT like taking
the elevator.
So for this trip, it will make things
easy for you, but it will make every
single trip that you take after it
harder
because there's some atrophy.
Absolutely.
By not taking the stairs,
right? And I sometimes take the elevator
and I sometimes take the stairs.
Dr. K, thank you. We have a closing
tradition on this podcast where the last
guest leaves a question for the next
guest, not knowing who they're leaving
it for. And a question that's been left
for you is
What is the most powerful love in your
life and why?
The most I mean I I would have to say
it's my the love for my nuclear family
like hands down and without a doubt. Um
and I think it's kind of interesting
because it's not localized on one
person. So, I have two daughters and I I
have a wife and we started playing
Dungeons and Dragons recently.
And we also I create we created a new
holiday called Mother's Day Eve, which
is like Christmas Eve, but for Mother's
Day. And I love this holiday. So, it's
basically like a chance like we we
prepare and we get all the stuff that my
wife loves like ready for her. And
instead of like Mother's Day being like,
oh, like here's breakfast in bed, like
we we like party basically doing all of
her favorite things. So, I'd say the mo
the biggest love in my life, I don't
remember exactly what the question is,
but I think it's encapsulated with
Mother's Day Eve. And I think if y'all
are listening to this and you want a
really fun holiday that has not been
overly commercialized, Father's Day Eve
and Mother's Day Eve are are the two.
Just like make a celebration of all the
things that this person does. Do it at
night the night before, not the morning.
And it's great.
Thank you.
Yeah. Thank you.
I really appreciate this these
conversations. I mean, I don't have to
tell you, but um every single time it
it's kind of like a reset in my life
speaking to you for so many reasons
because it helps me brings me back from
whatever [__] has consumed me since
we last spoke.
Yeah. I I
And uh it's really it's almost like a
baptism. That's the way I would describe
it. But I know it is for my listeners,
too, cuz they come up to me in the
streets. I was I was saying to you
before we started recording, they come
up to you all over the world. I remember
a lady in New York a couple of weeks ago
came over to me midworkout and told me
um what she was like I'm listening to
Dr. K right now and showed me her phone
and was like can you get her back on the
podcast? Um, and it's it's it's
incredible and I actually aspire to be
like you in so many ways because I think
there's a spiritual component to me that
I'm yet to explore. And I think spending
time with you as someone I trust so much
in so many areas really is a handheld
into a new realm which I'm a little bit
sort of hesitant to investigate.
Do I get to respond?
No, I'm joking. Of course, you do.
No, I mean sometimes we get into this
last word game where it's like meeting
of the mutual appreciation club. So
Stephen, I what I love about you and I I
really do love coming here. They say,
"Oh, you should have me back on the
podcast." What we create here is a diad.
There is a component that you bring. I
could not do this without you, right?
Right. So, like there's something that
you and I meet and then we make
something that is unique and I think
you're really good at making it with a
lot of people and you and I are going to
make our own kind of baby, you know,
and so it's it's honestly it's a blast.
Thank you.
[Music]